---
title: "The Game of Monopoly"
date: 2025-10-4
categories:
  - Insights
tags:
  - Capitalism
  - Social Justice
---

I learned to play Monopoly as a child. In Monopoly, each player begins the game with a token, fifteen hundred dollars, and a fair chance.

To some extent, luck determines the outcome of the game. At the beginning of each turn each player rolls a pair of dice. A few unfortunate rolls at the beginning of the game can doom a player's prospects.

To a much greater extent, strategy determines the outcome of the game. The player who purchases the most property early in the game gains a small advantage. That small advantage can be leveraged later in the game.

It is theoretically possible for a game of Monopoly to last forever. In this case, no player establishes a clear advantage over all of the others. So, that player and at least one other continue to play, turn after turn, maintaining a neutral cash flow.

Personally, I have never witnessed such a game.

Generally, when one player gains even the slightest advantage, that advantage is quickly leveraged. Because monopoly is a zero-sum game, one player's gain is another player's loss.

When children play Monopoly, the game generally ends when the first player goes bankrupt.  Sometimes the game ends because that child loses interest and distracts the others. Sometimes it ends because that child throws a temper tantrum. Either way, the game is never completed.

Sometimes adults play until all players, except for the winner, have gone bankrupt. This demonstrates the problem with the game of Monopoly and with unbridled capitalism. At the end of the game, the winner has no one left to play with.

The winner might continue to take turns until the bank is drained, but then what?

Unbridled capitalism is like the game of monopoly. When a few people have all of the money, to whom will they sell? From whom will they buy?






